# November 11th Critique - Paul Dapolito

## Preliminary [Design and Implementation](https://github.com/cvcal/NoteMatrixWithTonality/blob/master/documents/design_and_implementation.md)

### Design Feedback

I think that the design and implementation details you provide look great. I especially love how you fill-in different (pitch, time) values on the grid using the color of the corresponding instrument. It seems very intuitive, as a potential user, to select an instrument (by its color), and then fill in the appropriate sections of the grid to signify how and when I want the instrument to play. I think that this type of interface lends itself to a nice GUI, whose design you described quite nicely. 

In looking at the diagrams you provided, I am wondering about how a user might signify that an instrument should be played for several uninterrupted units of time (I'm sorry that I literally don't know any technical music lingo). In your first two diagrams, the grid seems to consist of discrete and discontinuous boxes, each representing a unique pitch and time pair. In your third diagram, though, you seem to consider the possibility of signifying that an instrument's sound should be played continuously over several units of time. Will your design for this interface include support for both of the following two use-cases?

   + playing an instrument discretely during two or more consecutive units of time
   + playing an instrument continuously over two or more consecutive units of time

With regard to your final grid diagram, I absolutely love the idea of looping over multiple grids in sequence. Will you also consider playing multiple grids in parallel? I realize that this would force you to consider the serialization issue that you raised in class, but I figured that the idea is worth mentioning :). In looking at your various design components, I am also wondering about the possibility of having users add their own instruments to the language. I know that you mentioned allowing users to select the colors associated with each instrument, and I think it'd also be cool if users could create their own instruments to incorporate into their musical programs.

### Implementation Feedback

I think your general layout and data structures are great, and I have a few suggestions regarding your implementation details.

Regarding programs in your language, I had thought (while reading over your design notes) that programs would consist of a list of grids, some number of instruments, and functionality to play/export particular grids or combinations of grids. As you mentioned, it logically follows to then represent Grids, Notes, and then Loops. I think that your note about implementing Timbre or Instruments is well-taken, and you should definitely look into incorporating an instrument library/libraries in order to focus more on the other aspects of your project's design. 

I like your idea of creating an external DSL to represent your DSL's internal representation, and I think that this gives you a particular gain in allowing you to thoroughly test your DSL before creating a GUI. One thing worth mentioning, though, is that I do not know how much an external DSL would really give your users. Users of your language will most likely want to use it in its graphical and interactive form, and the external DSL might be more of a tool for you to use in terms of testing and encoding programs in your language. These are definitely two very important use-cases, but you may be able to implement thorough testing through some other means (ie. users, GUI testing frameworks), and you can probably encode and decode programs in your language by utilizing open-source storage interfaces. While these solutions might seem less than ideal in terms of delivering a high-quality DSL (by objective standards), I think that, from looking through your [notebook entry](https://github.com/cvcal/NoteMatrix-project-notebook/blob/master/November%209.md) and [design and implementation notes](https://github.com/cvcal/NoteMatrixWithTonality/blob/master/documents/design_and_implementation.md), the design and implementation of your DSL's interactive environment might align most with your interests for the project.

## [Pressing Issues/Questions](https://github.com/cvcal/NoteMatrix-project-notebook/blob/master/November%209.md#questions)

### Delayed vs. Real-Time Tool

I think that, only initially, you should be okay with having your tool build in a delayed fashion. It seems that you are using the music libraries mainly for their instrumental functionality, and given this fact, starting your project using the delayed JMusic library will not limit you from optimizing the build process at some point later on in development. Judging by how you described your initial implementation plans for the project, your DSL will be modular enough such that you can incorporate a better instrumental library later on without having to employ a massive refactoring. At the very least, you will probably be able to speed-up the sound generation process using JMusic if you queue it some time interval after every entry by the user. 

I disagree with your point that incorporating real-time sound generation might make your DSL seem less like a language. I feel that, in developing software in any conventional programming language, we are often given instant feedback on our programs using fast key-commands to invoke even faster compilers and build processes. Relating this to your project, I am thinking that a musically naive user like myself might select an instrument, press one or two boxes, and then look to produce sound with the language in a relatively fast manner as to get a feel for my instrumental and linguistic toolsets within the language. In thinking about this, I certainly tend to lean towards yearning for a real-time composition tool in thinking about your DSL.

With this all said, I really agree with you on this being a complicated and thought-provoking problem to tackle. However, as I mentioned previously, I think you can defer this issue to later-on in your iterations of design and development and run with JMusic for now. This will allow you to become more familiar with JMusic and the other tools you are using, which in-turn with the very modular and extensible design plans you have already described, will better inform you as to the feasibility of transforming your DSL to incorporate real-time feedback.

I cannot speak much to the decision of whether you should use Scala or Java from an experiential point of view. I had only used Scala during the first-half of this class, and I have chosen not to use it in my own project. I have definitely found Java to be a more attractive option, but this is probably because I have developed in the language before. Given the wide scope and ambition of your project, especially with respect to your incorporation of musical and graphical components, I would tend to think that you will find more support if you used Java instead of Scala. By more support, I mean more APIs, libraries, documentation, and queries covered by StackOverflow. This also speaks to your last point, in that a project written in Java might be easier to share with others. Especially given the feedback-oriented approach we have taken towards our projects, I think you will probably find more expertise in the class for Java than you will find for Scala. I am not sure what your own experience levels are with Java or Scala, so I cannot truly speak to what would be best for you. Hopefully the points I presented will still give you some food for thought on the matter :).  

